Dragon Experimental Build

Currently we build for a Dragon64 but are not doing anything but initial
boot testing work. As we replace the ROMs it is kind of cheating. It won't
run on a Dragon 32 right now because it assumes the two page switching and
also it uses both ROMs on the 64. With banking it could in theory fit
entirely in a banked cartridge on COCO or COCO2 or Dragon32, but the
emulator doesn't emulate this and there is some hackery to be done to make
banking work ! On a COCO with text mode you'd get about 24K out of the 32K
RAM available for the user process.

Set Up

Get a copy of xroar, you *do not need* any ROM images
Instal lwtools and your preferred 6809 gcc
Set the Makefile to build for Dragon
make

copy the platform/*.rom files into your xroar working directory

xroar -machine dragon64 -cart-rom cart1.rom -cart-rom2 cart2.rom -cart
becker

Boot Sequence

The first ROM image is currently mostly empty. It contains a small bootstrap
that sets up the SAM (this must be done from ROM), clears low memory and
then unpacks the kernel data and other RAM based bits as a DECB stream.
Once unpacked it flips ROM and enters the kernel crt0.

Dragon & COCO Memory Mapping Notes:

These platforms are built around the 6883 SAM multiplexor for the 6809
processor. The SAM setup used in both cases allows for two different
mapping modes selected by $FFDE/$FFDF (Map)

Mode 0:
	0-$7FFF RAM
	$8000-$FEFF ROMs (system and cartridges)
	$FF00-$FFEF I/O
	$FFF0-$FFFF Magically mapped from top of ROM

Mode 1:
	0-$FEFF RAM
	$FF00-$FFEF I/O
	$FFF0-$FFFF Magically mapped from top of ROM

Less well known is that in Mode 0 you can select which 32K bank you want
mapped using $FFD4/5 (P bit)


There are three other things to note

1. The C000-FEFF range is the cartridge slot on the Dragon/COCO however it
may (shades of MSX) contain an MPI (the multi cartridge expander board) in
which case what is mapped depends upon $FF7F which is set by slot 1-4
(actually 0-3) as (slot << 4) | slot  (0x00 0x11 0x22 0x33...). Third party
extenders go to 8 slots. Disk is always in slot 4. Right now we don't care
about this but someone might if their disk is in another slot

2. There are a variety of 'fat COCO' type boards up to 512K using a second
SAM and reading not writing the SAM addresses

These allow all the 32K pages to be mapped in the low 32K with ROM, and
allows the low pages to be mapped low, in combination with high ram pages
mapped high. ie you've got n pages, only n/2 of them are mappable up top.

3. There is the 'Dragonplus' and the like for the Dragon32/64

The DragonPlus provides a selection between three different low banks in
the low 32K, and they can be overlaid with a 2K video RAM. In 32K Dragons
abusing the video ram is the only way for a non cartridge app to move stuff
initially between banks to set up the box (ewww...)

Selection is done via $FFE2 bits 0/1 00 - normal RAM, 10 bank A, 11 bank B,
1xx turns on the 2K video RAM overlay

All this makes things a bit ugly as we want to run partially  from Cartridge
(banked or otherwise) and that means we must have ROM mapped high, and RAM
low (there is no access to the high RAM with the cartridge paged in).

Equally we want user space to run from low addresses (for commonality) and
we want to protect kernel data from user accidents.

The map we are forced to use to handle the DragonPlus and to make the other
cases for userspace sane are:

Kernel
	0xC000-0xFEFF		Cartridge OS image
	0x0000-0x7FFF		RAM1

User
	0xC000-0xFEFF		Cartridge OS image
	0x0000-0x7FFF		RAM0 (or any other bank)

or (on a 64K box) in theory

User
	0x0000-0xDFFF		User
	0xE000-0xFFFF		RAM1 top used for display and kernel

To do that latter requires adding some additional vectors and bounce points
in the bottom 0x200 bytes of the RAM0 data area which for big processes do

	move stack down into the low space
	switch in catridge/ROM
	copy and restack the syscall arguments
	jsr rom interrupt vector
	switch out catridge/ROM
	switch stack back

and similar without the argument shuffle for interrupts.

this allows us to use all the banks effectively for 32K apps on all the
combinations. It also allows us to use some banks in the fat COCO2 case to
allow ~64K userspace apps

interrupt handling and syscall entry are interesting as we have no common RAM

To handle this the 6809 low-level code is polluted by SAM_ macros that sane
boxes can leave as blank. On a SAM based box we play pingpoing with the
banks using inline code (as the stack keeps vanishing under us) and the
map_ helpers are no-ops (we can't remap in a subroutine really). On a sane
box it works like you'd expect.

The video is fortunately simpler as the top bit for the CPU accesses via
the SAM uses the P bit as A15. The video takes B15 from the SAM not via P
(unclear how this works on DragonPlus and this is complicated on the 'fat'
 COCO add-ons as the video can be moved into high space too. The DragonPlus
fortunately has its own video anyway).

This basic setup should be compatible with any 6883/74LS783 based system
with 64K of RAM and at least 32K of ROM we can hide in. Note that the SAM
decoder doesn't require the other 32K of ROM decodes is ROM, it can be RAM.
However the COCO and Dragon don't allow for them being RAM.

In theory Dragon32 + DragonPlus would also work but the lack of common RAM
might make the the bank switch syscall path truely epic, ditto using the
64K to hold two user apps providing one is under 24K. Not impossible - we'd
need to stash the real "user" page map in address in the kernel map at say
address 6 when we flipped task and fixed in the user map. SAM_USER would
then become sta [6]. Something like that anyway.

Disks

Not supported yet.

With an expander we should look across all the cartridges to find out which
one is us and which one (should be slot #4) contains a cartridge with DK at
0xC000 indicating its the disk cartridge. (Could in theory be several)

Xroar emulates: DragonDOS, Delta and RSDOS disks. It doesn't emulate an
extender currently but you can have a disk, becker port and "wrong" ROMs in
one slot!

Also to consider

DriveWire - over Beckerport - serial 'virtual disk' protocol

CoCoSDC: SDC virtual disk including LBA mode interface for SD hard disk and
also flash for catridge slots (banked). Looks ideal but not documented
usefully.

Dragon	WD2797
	0xFF40 command
	0xFF41 track
	0xFF42 sector
	0xFF43 data
	0xFF48 drive control latch

Delta:	WD2791

RSDOS:	WD1793

Becker port at 0xFF40 (FF46 ? on Dragon)

IDE: FF70-FF78 - data latched (write high/load, read low/high) [0-7 IDE regs
		8 maps the latches]

Graphics option to do a less ugly console
