# Motorola 68000

## System Calls

The syscall API is as follows

trap #12

The trap number is chosen to avoid other traps we might want to use for
emulating things like TOS or CP/M 68K.

Arguments are placed as follows

    D0.W - call number
    D1.L - argument 1
    A0.L - argument 2
    A1.L - argument 3
    A2.L - argument 4

All system calls except fork (and in future possibly things like vfork)
save all registers except A0/A1/D0/D1. This matches the GCC ABI and avoids
too much stack pushing and popping. Four argument C callers need to save and
restore A2 first.

System calls are 32bit integer, 32bit pointer.

On return:

    D1.W is the error code if present or 0 if not.
    D0.L and A0.L hold the return code
    A1.L is destroyed.

Fork is special. The performance tricks for general syscalls mean that
fork() cannot restore all the registers. The kernel interface restores only
A5. A5 is chosen because it is used for the GOT on PIC binaries and without
A5 being kernel restored a signal just as a fork completes could make a nasty
mess. A5 is also used in kernel for the udata pointer.

Fork returns the same way as other calls.

To deal with all of this the fork wrapper in libc saves and restores the
other expected registers (all but A0/A1/D0/D1) so the trick is invisible to
normal C code.


## Signal Handling And VDSO

The kernel injects a short code block in the header space of the binary that is
not available otherwise. At the moment this consists of two entry points

0: trap and rts to make a system call. Not currently used as it appears
we don't need to change trap.
4: signal unwind code

The block is executed in user mode.

The internal behaviour of the signal handler is not defined to be ABI but
the following are guaranteed.

On entry to a signal handler the stack frame looks like a C call and holds
(low to high)

	Address of signal unwind code
	Signal number
	Pointer to copy of trap frame for hardware exceptions only
		(This is CPU specific so be careful!)
	Pointer to save of A0-A1/D0-D1 in MOVEM order with CCR above
	[Undefined]
	[A0-A1/D0-D1]
	[CCR]
	[Undefined]
	Return address

A program is permitted to

- longjmp out discarding the frame
- modify the saved A0-A1/D0-D1 and CCR (eg for emulation)
- directly set A2-A6/D2-D7 and have them passed back to the code 
  that caused the event. In other words you can set all registers.

The only portable property is the signal number.

## Executables

Executables are currently loaded using the ucLinux flat binary format. The
format has some serious problems so this may change.

Only flat binaries with standard relocations are currently supported. Although
the core kernel is designed to handle PIC the loader does not yet do GOT
relocations.

Compressed binaries are not supported, nor is executing from ROM.

The 'stack' space is also the sbrk space (akin to Minix). At the moment
malloc also uses this but that will change.

Binaries with GOTPIC will in future be executed re-entrantly so must be
clean and contain no data relocations. Other binaries should also have the
text clean as since we do memory swapping it will be possible to share the
code across forks (avoiding some of the copying due to MMUless).

Currently binaries are loaded as a single linear block with code, data and
bss in order then stack. This is *not* guaranteed.

The following binfmt_flat things want fixing ideally

- No field to identify target OS and CPU
- No field to identify any platform features wanted
- Relocations are very inefficiently stored
- Multiple segments cannot be loaded into different places (eg as AmigaOS can)
- Shared libraries including GOT accesses to private data

so the loader and format are likely to change once the platform develops
further

## Support Code

As well as generic support for the flat memory model C support library code is
provided in 68000exception.c for exception decoding and signal handling. The
code understands how to parse 68000/8 and 68010 stack frames, as well as how
to handle frames up to the MMUless 68020 configuration.

A single routine is provided

    int exception(struct trapdata *framedata)

This processes the passed frame and turns it into a user space signal or an
exception according to whether it came from kernel or user space. It is
generally invoked from the exception handlers in the core code, but can also
be used in any custom handlers as required.

## Assembly Support Code

The 68000 low level code provides the following functions to the C code or
platform level assembler.

	void *get_usp(void)

	Returns the user mode stack pointer

	void set_usp(void *p)

	Set the user mode stack pointer

	void enable_icache(void)

	Enable the instruction cache if present (68020). A no-op otherwise.

	void flush_icache(void)

	Flush the instruction cache if present (68020). A no-op otherwise.

	void install_vectors(void)

	Install the default trap and exception vector table entries. The
	reset vector and initial SP are not touched as those addresses are
	magic on some devices.

	int probe_memory(void *ptr)

	Probes a memory address and returns 0 if the memory does not bus
	error or one if it catches a bus error. Should be called with
	interrupts disabled.

	int cpu_type(void)

	Report the CPU type. Current this supports identifying
	68000/68010/68020. There is partial support for other CPU types
	but they are not suported by Fuzix yet.

	void dump_registers(void)

	Dump the CPU register state to the debug port

The following routines are available but primarily used directly by the
flat memory manager

	void copy_blocks(void *dest, void *source, uint32_t num)

	Copies num 512 byte, dword aligned blocks as fast as possible
	from source to dest, which must not overlap.

	void clear_blocks(void *dest, uint32_t num)

	Clear num 512 byte, dword aligned blocks as fast as possible.

	swap_blocks(void *p1, void *p2. uint32_t num)

	Swap num 512 byte, dword aligned blocks between p1 and p2 as fast
	as possible.

The following 68000 specific defines are required by the generic code

	DI_MASK: Bits that should be set in SR for 'interrupt disabled'

	EI_MASK: Bits that should be set in SR for 'interrupt enabled'

This can be used to leave interrupts always disabled, or to allow interrupts
to occur during kernel 'disabled' regions providing those functions do not
invoke kernel methods. This can be very useful for things like serial port
servicing where the bytes are queued for receive, or dequeued for send from
buffers that are emptied or filled on the timer interrupt.

