# Appendix: RC2014 I/O Map

## Introduction

RC2014 is a bus standard for retrocomputing. It occupies a similar place to
the historic S100 bus although slightly less featureful. Like S100 it also
has developed a rather adhoc I/O port mapping arrangement.

Fuzix expects devices to be mapped in particular places, that generally
follow the standard conventions.

## Serial Ports

### Z80 SIO

For Z80 based systems only: Z80 SIO at 0x80-0x83, second SIO optionally at
0x84-0x87. There is unfortunately no standard relationship or configuration
for baud rate setting even on boards that support it.

Warning: the Spencer Owen Z80 SIO does not decode A2 so repeats at 0x84-0x87
preventing the use of a second SIO card.

### 68B50

68B50 ACIA at either 0xA0-0xA1 (systems using ROMWBW to boot) or 0x80-0x81
(systems using SCMonitor). No baud rate configuration. A note of caution -
'classic' 68B50 RC2014 boards place the 68B50 at all of 0x80-0xBF which
limits other options severely.

### 16Cx50

Probed for at 0xC0, 0xC8, 0xD0, 0xD8, 0xE0, 0xE8, 0xF0 and 0xF8. These UARTs
have inbuilt baud rate control and are expected to be clocked at 1.832MHz.

### XR82C684 (QUART)

For Z80 based systems only: Experimental support for the quad UART at 0xBB.

### Z180 Built In Ports

Features vary by board.

## Clock / Timer

### Z80 CTC

For Z80 based systems only: A Z80 CTC at 0x88-0x8B clocked from the standard
RC2014 clock. If it is clocked at non-standard rates it will still work but
you will need to customise your kernel or time will tick by at the wrong rate.

The CTC must be configured with CTC 2 feeding into CTC 3. 

### 6522 VIA

A 6522 VIA at 0x60-0x6F clocked at the CPU E clock. 6502 systems only.

### 82C54

An 82C54 at 0x3C-0x3F. Currently only supported for 8085 based systems.
Channel 0 is free for use. Channel 1 is expected to be clocked at 1.8432MHz
and feed into channel 2. Channel 2 in turn provides an output that is
inverted for use as an interrupt line. That is channel 2 output high causes
an interrupt.

### DS1302 RTC

A DS1302 RTC at port 0x0C or port 0xC0. RC20144 expects write only access to
then CE line on bit 4, HIZ bit 5, CLK bit 6, data out bit 7 and read access
to the data in bit 0.

## Disk Controllers

### Compact Flash

An 8bit compact flash adapter mapped at 0x10-0x17 in ATA register order and
without access to the control register space. No interrupt support is
needed.

Warning. The standard CF adapter interface is very fussy about the cards
used. This is even more true when using non Z80 processors.

### PPIDE

82C55 based IDE at 0x20-0x23. A full 16bit interface to hard disks and CF
adapters. Unlike the CF adapter the interface provides buffering and
isolation from the CPU. This however has a performance cost.

### WD37C65 Floppy

Floppy disk interface at 0x48/0x50-0x58.

## Video Interfaces

### TMS9918A

The classic TMS9918A composite video at 0x98/0x99 matching the MSX port
numbering. Interrupts should be enabled when using this device as a timer
interrupt source.

Caution: older versions of the board are missing a diode to avoid fighting
on the interrupt line. For such adapters fit the diode across the interrupt
enable pins or do not use interrupts.

## Miscellaneous

### Z80DMA

Z80 DMA controller at 0x04 (Z80 systems only)

### WizNET 5300

The WizNet interface is expected to be at 0x28-0x2B

### ZX Keyboard Interface

The matrix keyboard interface is mapped at 0xFC-0xFF

### Joystick

Joystick interfaces at 0x01 and 0x02 (read only)

### Debug

VFD debug at 0x00-0x01 (write only)

### Memory Banking

The 512K/512K banked memory used by the Z80 port uses the registers at
0x70-0x7F. The MMU for the 80C85 systems uses the port 0xFF. Due to the way
the matrix keyboard interface works this does not conflict.

### Z180 Internal Registers

These are mapped at 0x00C0-0x00FF on ROMWBW systems and 0x0040-0x007F on SCM
based systems.

## Reserved

### Second CF Adapter

0x18-0x1F for a second CF dapter (must be fully decoded)

### Propellor Graphics

0x40-0x43 for the propellor based graphics adapter from user space

### AY-3-8910

AY-3-8910 at 0xD0

## To Be Assigned

Secondary processor cards

## Summary In Port Order

This also includes non standard ports used by some RC2014 compatible systems
and provisional assignments.

| Range | R/W | Device |
| ----- | --- | ------ |
|00-01 | (W) | VFD|
|01-01 | (R) | Joystick 1|
|02-02 | (R) | Joystick 2|
|03-03 | (RW) | SC129 as bitbang SPI]
|04-04 | (RW) | Z80 DMA (Z80 only)|
|0C    | (RW) | DS1302 RTC|
|0C    | (RW) | SC126 RTC/I2C/SPI|
|0D    | (RW) | SC126 LED lights|
|0D    | (RW) | SC129 default I/O port|
|10-17 | (RW) | CF 1|
|18-1F | (RW) | CF 2 (reserved)|
|1F-1F | (W) | Banking on SBC64/MB64|
|10-1F | (RW) | KIO/Z84C15 on Micro80 only|
|20-23 | (RW) | PPIDE|
|28-2B | (RW) | WIZNET|
|30-3F | (W) | Banking on RC2014 minimal systems|
|30    | (W) | Baking on SC114|
|38    | (W) | Banking on SC108/SC114|
|3C-3F | (RW) | 82C54|
|40-43 | (RW) | Propellor Graphics|
|48-48 | (RW) | FDC|
|50-51 | (RW) | FDC|
|58-58 | (RW) | FDC|
|60-6F | (RW) | 6522 VIA (6502 only)|
|68-6B | (RW) | Z80 PIO 1 (Z80 only)|
|6C-6F | (RW) | Z80 PIO 2 (Z80 only)|
|70-7F | (W) | 512K Banked RAM/ROM|
|80-83 | (RW) | SIO 1 (Z80 only)|
|80-81 | (RW) | ACIA (SCMonitor)|
|84-87 | (RW) | SIO 2 (Z80 only)|
|88-8B | (RW) | CTC 1 (Z80 only)|
|8C-8F | (RW) | CTC 2 (Z80 only)|
|90-97 | (RW) | CF 1 partial decode (used on Micro80 etc as CF 1 port)|
|98-99 | (RW) | TMS9918A|
|A0-A1 | (RW) | ACIA (ROMWBW, non Z80)|
|BA-BA | (RW) | QUART (XR82C684)|
|BB-BB | (RW) | PS/2 Keyboard|
|BC-BF | (RW) | Coprocessors|
|C0-FF | (RW) | Z180 Internal|
|C0-C0 | (RW) | DS1302 RTC (legacy)|
|C0-C7 | (RW) | 16x50|
|C8-CF | (RW) | 16x50|
|D0-DF | (RW) | AY-3-8910|
|D0-D7 | (RW) | 16x50|
|D8-DF | (RW) | 16x50|
|E0-E7 | (RW) | 16x50|
|EE-EF | (RW) | Z84C15 (Z84C15 only)|
|E8-EF | (RW) | 16x50|
|F0-F7 | (RW) | 16x50|
|F0-F1 | (RW) | Z84C15 (Z84C15 only)|
|F4-F4 | (RW) | Z84C15 (Z84C15 only)|
|F8-FF | (RW) | 16x50|
|F8-F9 | (RW) | SBC64 CPLD UART (SBC64/MB64 only)|
|FC-FF | (R) | ZX Keyboard|
|FF-FF | (W) | Simple MMU (80C85 etc) |

